So, far in our journey we have studied how
to represent on line which is a geometric object in algebraic manner using various forms
of equations. This is a time to recollect; what are the forms of equations that we have
studied and understand some common properties commonalities in that equation of line and
give a general equation of line which will be helpful for further analysis. So, let us
see what are the different forms of line; equations of line that we have studied. So, in particular we had two forms one is
two point form another when its slope point form. So, first I will list the slope point
form a specialization or specialized version of this is slope intercept form where instead
of a point you have been given x intercept or a y-intercept. Then we have also studied
two point form given two points how to uniquely determine a line and a specialized version
of that is nothing but intercept form. So we can quickly review these forms like
slope point form we have a point x naught y naught which is given to us and a slope
m that is given to us. So, we come up with an equation when we give the representation
of this line algebraic representation of this line with slope y with slope m and point x
naught y naught we will come up with a representation as y minus y naught is equal to m times x
minus x naught when you come to slope intercept form suppose the x intercept is given to me
if I have been given an x intercept then the y coordinate of that point will be 0. So let us say x intercept is d in that case
my equation from slope point form as slope intercept form is a specialized version of
slope in point form my equation will become y minus 0 is equal to m times if the intercept
is at d, d. So, y is equal to m times x – d, in a similar manner so the y intercept is
given to me and that intercept is at c then my y naught will be replaced by c and x naught
will be replaced by 0 therefore I will come up with
an equation y is equal to m x plus c that is what is listed here y is equal to mx plus
c given a y-intercept and given an x intercept the equation has a form y is equal to m times
x – d. Let us come to two point form we have also
seen during the course that this two point form is closely related to slope point form.
We also know that given any two points on a line we can determine the slope of a line
so in this particular expression m will be replaced by the ratio of the change in y upon
change in x. Therefore the two point form two point form will be just replica of this
instead of m you will have the difference between y-axis difference between the coordinates
of y-axis and difference between the coordinates of x-axis that will be given in this form. Now remember here the points given are not
x naught y naught so the points given are x1 y1 and x2 y2 therefore x naught is replaced
by x 1 and y naught is replaced by y1 and this thing is nothing but a replacement of
m that is how these two forms are also closely related. In an intercept form you will get
two intercepts x intercept let us say x intercept is a and y intercept is b then how will these
forms change? If x intercept is a that means I have a point
a comma 0 so my x1 y1 will be nothing but x1 is equal to a y1 is equal to 0 and y2 minus
y1 will be b upon x 2 minus x 1 will be minus a so b upon minus a is equal to b upon minus
a into x minus a is equal to y and if you simplify that you will come up with a very
simple expression of the form x by a plus y by b. So, here there is a no-brainer nothing
to remember below x you write x-intercept below y you write y-intercept and equate it
with 1. Now if you look at all these forms there is
one common feature you have y what are the variables in this because given a point x
naught let us take the slope point form given a point x naught y naught this x naught and
y naught is fixed. The slope of a line is fixed. So, now what we are identifying is
we are identifying in a condition in the form of x, y what these coordinates should satisfy.
So, the variables are x and y. If you look at all these forms the same the
same feature is visible, the variables are x and y and I have an expression of the form
some constant times y some constant times x and added with another constant. Let us
take this feature for example y minus y naught is equal to mx minus x naught now I want to
differentiate between variables and constant. So, I can simply write this as y minus m times
x is equal to y naught minus m x naught, y naught minus m x naught will be the constant
associated with this particular equation and y and the and the variable one variable y
is associated with real coefficient 1 and variable x is associated with real coefficient
minus m. So in particular I can have a general form
of the equation and similar story is true for all this. For example if you come here
I will have with x there is a variable associated 1 by 1 by a with y there is a with variable
x 1 by a is a real coefficient that is associated with variable y 1 by b that is a real coefficient
that is associated and the constant is C. So, I can discuss same things about all these
features but one thing is common that I can have a general form of equation which will
be of the form Ax plus By plus C equal to 0. Now let us identify this particular general
form with our various expressions like slope point form the way I discussed the slope point
form we already know. In this case we have assumed that b is equal to 1 but I can as
well multiply by a constant term throughout the equation and we will have the same equation.
So, assuming this holds true let us discuss about this this particular expression. So,
in this case you can easily see if I relate this equation with this equation that is you
rewrite this as minus m x minus y is minus y plus y naught minus m x naught is equal
to 0. In that case you can have this expression
which will give you m the value of m will be given when you compare with respect to
this expression as minus A by B and value of y naught minus m x naught now remember
this is a constant term because all these are constants of the line. So, y naught minus
m x naught is equal to minus C by B. If you are able to understand this then you can easily
understand the slope intercept form. Because in the slope-intercept form what we have is
if you take this form which is y is equal to mx plus c you have y-intercept which is
c therefore your y naught will be replaced by c and x naught will be replaced by 0 so
if you look at this expression m will still remain minus A by B when I am identifying
this equation m will still remain by minus A by B y naught is identified with C minus
minus A by B x naught is 0 so this becomes irrelevant so y naught is c so c is equal
to minus capital C by B. In a similar manner you can do for x-intercept and you will get
these expressions. So m as I as I mentioned minus c by minus
A by B c is minus C by B and d is minus C by A for getting d you just put x naught is
equal to d and y naught is equal to 0 you will get this expression. So, same exercise
can be done for two point form and intercept form remember this m will be replaced by a
ratio of these two numbers ratio of these two differences. So, m m is replaced by a
ratio of these two differences there is no x naught y naught there will be x 1 y 1 therefore
you will have an expression of this form. But remember this minus C by B is common everywhere
the slope is minus A by B everywhere so essentially, we have got one simple general equation. Similar
things you can do for x by A plus y by B equal to 1 that is intercept form and you will get
a to be equal to minus C by A, b to be equal to minus C by B. So, what we have seen here
is an exact matching one-to-one correspondence of a general equation with respect to this
equation. Now why should I consider general equation?
Remember when we figured out this representation our assumption was these are non vertical
lines. For vertical lines our slope do not exist right but in this case if you; and those
cases, those lines are where the slope do not exist those lines are vertical lines.
They are of the form x is equal to x is equal to some some constant right. If you look at
this equation which is a general form of this equation you just put b to be equal to 0 you
will get A x plus C is equal to 0 that means x is equal to some constant x is equal to
minus C by A you will get that is what our intercept form also reveals. So all these lines are actually vertical lines,
so this general equation is capable of handling vertical lines also, horizontal lines are
anyway handled here because if you put m is equal to 0 the horizontal line is handled.
Over as well while we were deriving these forms we were always assuming non-vertical
lines. So, that non-vertical lines also justified non-vertical lines are covered as well as
vertical lines are covered therefore this equation is a general form of equation of
a line. Also in your earlier classes you might have
studied this as a polynomial in without this equal to 0 Ax plus By plus C is a polynomial
in two variables and it is a linear polynomial in two variables. Therefore you will hear
a term called linear equation in two variables. So, in particular if this two this has to
represent a form of line equation of line general form of a equation of line then A
and B cannot be simultaneously equal to 0. If A and B are simultaneously equal to 0 then
I am actually equating constant with a 0 which is invalid therefore the assumption will always
be A and B cannot be simultaneously equal to 0. Though individually they can be equal
to 0 for example you can put A is equal to 0 then you will get y is equal to some constant
which is a line parallel to x axis. You can put B is equal to 0 then you will get a line
x is equal to constant, x is equal to constant is parallel to y axis. So now we will bring up a definition that
any equation of the form Ax plus B y plus C is equal to 0 where A and B are not equal
to 0 simultaneously individually they can be 0 or they can be nonzero as well is called
general linear equation because we are handling a linear linear polynomial which is equated
to 0 so it is an equation, general linear equation or general equation of a line. So,
what we are summarizing here is a polynomial in two variables or and general linear equation
in two variables gives you line. So this is the identification of a geometric
object called straight line with an algebraic representation of general linear equation.
So, this will give us both the strength in our analysis because now you do not have to
discuss about the line. But you can as well discuss about its algebraic representation
or you can start with an algebraic representation of a line and then discuss about the geometric
properties of the line. How let us see in the next slide. So, here is an example, so the example says
the example gives you a question that the equation of a line is 3x minus 4y plus 12
is equal to 0. Now I do not know how this line behaves now I want to see how this linear
equation represents a line. So, when I talk about a line what is what is the natural question
we will talk about what the what are the two points that uniquely determine this line or
you can ask what is the slope of a line and give me one point on a line because we have
slope-intercept form or we have two point form any of them should be usable. So in order to discuss about the geometric
aspects we can ask a question that find the slope or x intercept or y intercept of a line.
So, how will you find this the job is pretty simple let us go back and revisit the previous
slide which will make the job very simple. Suppose I want to determine the x-intercept
and y-intercept then I have this intercept form right which says that A is the x-intercept
and B is the y-intercept. Now you I have been given an equation in this
form which is Ax plus B y plus C is equal to 0 so I can image lately consider this equation
and consider the values of A and B which is minus C by A and B is equal to minus C by
B. So, let us go and do the same thing on the on the our; now our problem so we have
identified Ax plus By plus C equal to 0. So, what is A, A is 3, B is minus4, C is positive
12 right. So, what should be my x intercept A as you have seen in the previous slide is
minus C by A. So what is C? 12 upon A which is 3 so my A
is 4, let me go and once again check A is minus C by A so that is 12 by 3 which is 4
so, minus C by A, 12 by 3 which is 4 and a minus sign associated with it so a minus4.
In a similar manner you can talk about y intercept which is 12 by minus 4 so minus 3 but a minus
sign because it is minus C by B so it will be 3. So, now we can readily answer the question
what is on a x-intercept and y-intercept. Now the question comes what is the slope of
a line. So, for slope of a line you can use the slope intercept form y is equal to mx
plus c. So, identify this equation in the form of y is equal to mx plus c so if you
look at this equation y if I want to make this y is equal in the form of y is equal
to mx plus c I should push this 4y to the right hand side that gives me y is equal to
3 by 4 plus 12 by 4 which is 3. So, my m should be 3 by 4 this is the answer. So, slope intercept
form you have y is equal to 3 by 4 x plus 3 so the slope is naturally 3 by 4 this is
this easy is our calculation. Now we have identified an algebraic object
as a geometric object. Now let us let us see what we can do further and we can we can actually
verify this graphically you know although it may be correct it is always better to verify
it graphically. So, slope is 3 by 4 x intercepts should be minus 4 and y intercept should be
3 if this line it said; if you you want to satisfy the equation of this line this should
happen right. So this is how we have drawn so the x-intercept
is minus 4, y intercept is 3 and the line passes through this. Now you pick for verification
purposes you can pick any point on this line and you can put the values of the coordinates
into the equation of a line and verify that it will; put it will give you the value 0
that will be the identification that your answer is correct.