So, we have seen Sets, now let us move on
to Relations. As we saw a set is a collection of items and we can construct new sets from
old sets. So, we can take unions combine two sets into one. We can take intersections,
take the common elements. We can take the difference that is take the elements of X
which are not in Y and if we define the universe with with respect to which we are working,
we can define the complement those elements that are not in X.
Now, in general we are interested in carving out subsets of a set and so, we use the set
comprehension notation. So, what this does is it takes a base set and takes elements
of that set, then it applies some condition those elements we are interested in and then
it collects them all together. So, we can take all the integers which are divisible
by 2 or not divisible by 2 in this case, so we get the odd one; so, those where the remainder
is 1. Or we can take all fractions in which the
numerator and the denominator have no common divisor or we can take for instance the real
numbers which lie in an interval in the with the left closed interval 3 and the right open
interval 17. So, now, we will see a new way to combine
sets to form new sets and this is called the Cartesian product. And, in the Cartesian product
basically what we do is we take two sets and we take one element from each and form a pair.
So, A cross B as it is called is the set of all pairs which we write with this normal
bracket notation a comma b such that the first element A comes from the big the set capital
A and the second element comes from the set capital B .
So, for instance, if A is the set 0, 1 and B is a set 2, 3 then all possible pairs we
can form in the Cartesian product a 0 combined with 2. So, 0 comma 2, 0 comma 3 and then
1 combined with 2, 1 comma 2 and 1 comma 3. So, we have four possible pairs .
Now, in sets we said that the order of the element is not important, but of course, when
we are doing this kind of a pairing, then we know that the left set comes from the left
part of the product and the right element comes from the right part of the product . So,
for example, 0 comma 1 is not equal to 1 comma 0. So, here we have to respect the order when
we talk about a pair. Now, if we have sets of numbers right then
we normally visualize the product as a space which we draw familiarly as a graph. So, for
instance if we take N cross N then we draw N cross N as this grid, where on the x-axis
you have one copy of N, on the y-axis you have another copy of N . And, for example,
if you want to look at the pair 2 comma 3, then such that the x-coordinate is 2 and the
y-coordinate is 3 and you get this point and similarly, if you look at the point 5 comma
6 you get this point right. So, you can take the first coordinate plot
it on the x-axis; take the second coordinate plot it on the y-axis and where those two
points meet in the grid is the point that we are interested in. So, this is one way
of visualizing a binary relation on numbers. And, we can do the same thing if you are using
say the reals, in which case the grid points that we are going to plot will have real coordinates
and not just natural number coordinates. So, now we have this Cartesian product which
consists of all possible pairs of the two sets and as we did with set comprehension
we might want to pick out some of these sets some of these pairs and this is what we call
a relation. So, we combine this Cartesian product operation
with set comprehension. So, for instance, we can take all pairs of numbers which are
natural numbers n comma n, but we want to insist that the second number is 1 plus the
first number. So, we get for instance 0, 1 because the second
number one is 0 plus 1; 2, 3 because 3 is 2 plus 1, 17, 18 and so on . And, if we plot
these points alone on the right then we get these so, we get a subset of the overall points
and this these points satisfied this set comprehension condition .
Another example would be pairs again of natural numbers d comma n, where d is a factor of
n. Remember, d is a factor of n means that if I divide n by d, I get remainder 0. So,
for instance 2 is a factor of 82, 14 is a factor of forty 56. So, these will be points
in our relation. So, this is what is called a binary relation. So, formally it is a subset
of the product. So, we take the Cartesian product all possible pairs and then we apply
some kind of a condition which filters out the pairs of interest to us and it gives us
therefore, a subset of pairs and this is what we call a relation.
Now, to denote the pairs that belonged to the relation either we can give the name of
the relation as a set and say that a comma b belongs to R or sometimes to say that a
is related to b we use R as a kind of operator. We say a is related by R to b and so, we write
a R b. So, these are two notations which you might see in different books and they mean
exactly the same thing. So, let us let us look at some other examples
of relations outside the numbers. So, supposing you have a school in which there are some
teachers and some courses to be taught. So, T is the set of teachers; C is the set of
courses that are being offered in this term, then you need to describe which teachers are
teaching which courses. So, we would have an allocation relation A which is a subset
of all possible pairs T cross C. So, every teacher and principle could be teaching
every course, but of course, this is not normally the case. We do not have all teachers teaching
all courses, we have some teachers teaching some courses. So, we would specifically say
take every pair of possible teacher course pairs, then we take out those were precisely
the teacher T is actually teaching the course C and we collect those together to form this
allocation relation. So, here is a different graphical way of describing
a relation not in terms of the grid and the graph that we have learned when we do graphs
in school. So, this is also called a graph, but this is a graph in which we have some
nodes representing the elements on the set. So, on the left hand side we have five teachers,
on the right hand side we have 5 four courses and the arrows from the left hand side to
the right hand side connect the pairs which are in the relation. So, we see that Kumar
teaches maths; Deb teaches history and so on.
So, this is a useful useful way of visualizing relations on finite sets and we will see this
often as we go along. Another example of a similar type of a relation is that between
a parent and a child specifically let us look at mothers and children. So, if we have a
set of people in a country, then we can take the set of all pairs of people and then isolate
from that pairs in which the first element of the pair is the mother of the second element.
So, we want m comma c which belongs to P cross P such that m is the mother of c.
So, let us go back to a numbers. So, supposing we want to plot all points which are in R
cross R which are at a distance 5 from 0, comma 0 which is normally called the origin.
So, one thing you need to know for this we probably you should have learned this at some
point is that if I take a point a comma b and calculate its difference from 0 comma
0. So, this is calculated using the Pythagoras theorem and it comes out to be square root
of a squared plus b squared. So, in other words, the relation we are looking
for in this case is all a comma b whose distance from 0 comma 0 is 5. So, all a comma b and
R cross R such that the square root of a squared plus b squared is equal to 5. So, here are
some of the points 0 comma 5 for instance you can see 0 comma 5 is there because the
sum is 0 plus 25 and the square root of that is 5. 3 comma 4 is there because 3 squared
is 9, 4 squared is 16, 9 plus 16 is 25, square root to 25 is again 5.
So, interestingly these points if we plot every such point in R cross R which satisfies
this actually defines a circle of radius 5 with center at 0 comma 0. So, relations can
define interesting geometric shapes and very often we do deal with geometric shapes in
this relational form because it is easier to manipulate than looking at pictures. Now,
depending on how we are going to view a relation, we can look at it in different ways.
So, remember that we looked at rationals in reduced form. So, we said that a rational
in reduced form has p comma q, p by q such that p and q are integers and the gcd is 1
right; that means, that they do not have a greatest common divisor other than 1. But,
we can also think of this as a relation on integers itself. We want all pairs of integers.
So, every rational is really a pair of integers, the numerator and the denominator and we want
every pair of integers where the gcd is 1, that is, there is no common divisor.
So, we do not have to restrict our self to binary relations. The Cartesian product notation
extends to multiple sets. Let us look at three sets for instance. Remember, Pythagoras theorem
which says that the square on the hypotenuse is the sum of the squares on the opposite
sides. So, what values of a, b and c could be the sides of a right triangle are determined
by Pythagoras's theorem. So, we would say that a, b and c is a valid
triple in the Pythagoras sense if a, b, c belongs to N cross N cross N. So, here we
now have three copies of N and a, b, c must all be nonzero. They must all be positive
length, we do not want to have triangles in which one line one side is collapsed to a
point and we want the constraint that a squared plus b squared is equal to c squared .
Here is another example. Suppose, we look at squares on the plane squares with real
corners right. So, a corner is a point x comma y which is in R cross R. So, we define the
x coordinate and the y coordinate that defines the corner of a square and we want four corners
which together form a square if we connect them by lines. So, for instance, if you look
on the right the four blue dots correspond to a square which is cornered at 0, 0; 0,
2; 2, 0 and 2, 2. The red square is also red points also define
a square because this is a rotated square, but then if you rotate it vertically you will
turn out that this diamond is actually a square . So, there are many such four sets of points
which form the corners of squares and we might be interested in all such four sets of points.
So, now, we have a relation which involves four sets of points, but each point itself
is a pair of real numbers; it is an x and a y.
So, square if we think of it as a relation is actually a relation on R squared that is
the first corner times R squared the second corner times R squared the third corner and
the fourth corner R squared again. So, this is actually either a relation on eight copies
of R or if you want to group it four copies of pairs of R .
So, this just says that we can take relations on arbitrary an arbitrary number of copies
of a set and we get larger and larger from pairs we move to triples we move to quadruples
and in general if we have n copies we call this an n tuple .
So, there are some special binary relations which pop up all over the place. So, it is
useful to know their names. The first one is called the identity relation and as you
would expect, the identity relation maps every element to itself. So, if I take A cross A,
so, first of all the identity relation is defined on two copies of the same set because
identity means equality. So, I take A cross A. So, this has all kinds of pairs a comma
b, where both a and b belong to A and now, I want the condition that a is equal to b.
So, in other words, I want things of the form a comma a. So, if I plot this for instance
on the natural numbers and N cross N, then I get 0, 0; 1, 1 and so on, and these are
the points which are drawn on the right in this grid .
Now, point of notation we sometimes it is tedious to write this notation as it is says
us a comma b time in n. So, we do not want to you know have to write out this long thing.
So, sometimes we simplify this by saying I want all pairs such that a comma a belongs
to A cross A. So, what we are really saying is that the second day and the first day must
be the same. So, we are collapsing the equality and this. Now, this is not technically correct,
but this is often used in order to simplify the notation .
And, sometimes we might drop the product altogether. We might just say we want all pairs a comma
a where a comes from the set A. So, in other words we are pulling out one copy of the element
from the set and then we are constructing a pair by taking two copies of it. So, all
of these are equivalent ways of writing this although only the first one technically follows
the notation that we are using to introduce relations .
Now, there are some properties that relations may have. The first one is called reflexivity.
So, reflexivity refers to the fact that an element is related to itself. So, a reflexive
relation is one in which for every element a; a comma a belongs to R. So, in other words
based on what we just wrote above, it means that the identity relation is included in
R. So, it does not mean that that is the only thing. The identity relation has only the
reflexive elements. A relation that is reflexive will have the identity pairs and it will have
other pairs, but it must have all the identity pairs to be called reflexive .
A symmetric relation for instance is one where if a, b is there, then b a must be there.
So, for instance looking at reflexive relations one example is the division relation. So,
if we provided we make sure that the numbers are not 0, then we know it is reflexive because
every number divides itself. So, if we take the reflect division relation as the relation
that we introduced in the first part of this lecture that would be reflexive because a
divides a for every a which is not 0. Similarly, symmetric relations if we look
at pairs where the greatest common divisor is 1, in other words they have no common divisors.
This is what happens for example, in reduced fractions, then it does not matter whether
we write it as a comma b or b comma a. So, if a comma b has greatest common divisor 1,
so does b comma a. So, a comma b and b comma a must both either be there in the relation
or neither will be there. Similarly, if we look at this which is asking
about the absolute value so, it is saying give me all numbers a and b such that a minus
b is either plus 2 or minus 2. So, the absolute value takes the difference and removes the
negative sign. Now, we see that for instance if 5 comma 7 is there, then 7 comma 5 must
be there because they both have the same difference depending on how we write it. Normally, in
subtraction we have a sign difference, but because we are taking the absolute value there
is no difference actually between these two . So, this absolute value relation also if
we fix is a symmetric relation. A third property that relations may have and
which are useful is called transitivity. So, transitivity says that if we have two pairs
which are related such that they share an elements. So, a is related to b and b is related
to c, then a must be related to c. So, again our divisibility is a relation. So, supposing
we say that 2 divides 6 and we say that 6 divides 36, then from this we can conclude
that 2 divides 36 as well, right. Similarly, if we take less than if we say
that 3 is less than 10 and 10 is less than 28, then we know from this that 3 must be
less than 28. So, this is transitivity. So, if we want to draw it pictorially if we
have three elements a and a, b and c and this arrow remember we had this graph notation
which says a is related to b and b is related to a, then this dashed line represents the
requirement for transitivity a must be related to c .
Now, we saw symmetry. So, symmetry says that if a, b is in R, then b comma a must also
be in R. Anti-symmetry says something different it says if a, b is in R, then b comma a should
not be in R. So, less than for example, which was transitive above is also anti-symmetric.
If you take strictly less than, if a is strictly less than b then it cannot be that be strictly
less than a. So, this is an anti symmetric relation, but anti symmetry does not require
that one of the two must be there. It only says that if one pair is there the opposite
pair should not be there ok. Similarly, if we look at our mother and children
example; obviously, if p is the mother of c then c cannot be the mother of p ok. Now,
there may be p and c such that neither p is the mother of c nor is c is the mother of
p. So, that is allowed. We do not insist that every pair p comma c must be related one way
or another, but if it is related one way it should not be related the other way is what
anti-symmetry says. So, if we combine some of these conditions
we get an interesting class relations called equivalence relations. So, equivalence relation
is something that is reflective, reflexive, symmetric and transitive. So, as an example
supposing we connect together all numbers which have the same remainder modulo 5. So,
for instance 7 has a remainder 2 with respect to 5 and so does 22. So, 7 and 5 would be
related in this way if we define the relationship as having the same remainder modulo 5.
Now, notice that if two numbers have the same remainder modulo 5; that means, that going
from one number to the other you are going in multiples of 5. So, for instance 22 minus
7 is 15 right. So, this is this modulo arithmetic. So, if you add the number that you are dividing
by, then you get the same remainder and so, in set notation we can say that the integers
modulo 5 are all pairs a, b such that b minus a mod 5 is 0. In other words, we are not asking
what is the actual remainder of b and a, we are just saying that b and a are separated
by a multiple of 5 therefore, they must have the same remainder modulo 5.
Now, this divides the integers into five groups if I based on the remainder. So, there are
the group of numbers which are divisible by 5, they have remainder 0. Those like 6, 11
and all which have remainder 1, 7, 12 and all which one remainder 2 and so on. So, we
have five possible remainders 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 and therefore, this divides the set of integers
into five disjoint classes. As an example of modulo arithmetic that we
are all familiar with, consider what happens when we look at a normal clock. Now, a normal
clock measures time from 0 to 12 and then cycles around again. So, though there are
24 hours in a day, the clock is actually partitioning these 24 into two sets where we have 0 and
12 as same, 1 and 13 as same and so on right. So, 2 am and 2 pm there is no distinction
on the clock . So, the clock is actually showing us this
equivalence class of hours regarding am and pm as being equal and we have to know from
context whether the clock is showing am or pm. So, the main thing to note about an equivalence
relation is that it partitions a set. It partitions a set into disjoint groups, all of the elements
within a group are equivalent and all of the elements outside across groups are not equivalent
to each other. So, the groups of equivalent elements that
we formed through an equivalence relation are called equivalence classes . So, this
might look a little abstract now, but equivalence classes really represent a kind of equality
and sometimes we are happy to work with this equality in terms of equivalence relations
rather than actual equality and it has very much the same properties as equality does
. So, to summarize as we have seen a Cartesian
product can generate n-tuples of elements from n sets. So, if we have x 1, x 2, up to
x n n n sets these can be different or the same then we can take one element from each
set and form an n-tuple small x 1, small x 2 up to small x n . And, when we now pick
out some particular subset of these n-tuples we get a relation. So, for instance, if we
take pairs from N cross R and we want the second element of the pair the real number
to be the square root of the first element, then we get N cross R such that r is square
root of m . So, here on the right we have seen we show
one picture of this. So, there are some elements like 2 comma square root of 2, 4 comma 2,
7 comma square root of 7 and so on. Now, just notice that in this picture the y-axis is
elongated compared to the x-axis. So, this is not in some sense to scale in both dimensions
because the square root function behaves like this.
So, we have seen that there are some properties that we would like to record of binary relations
- reflexivity, symmetry, transitivity and sometimes anti-symmetry. And, using reflexivity,
symmetry and transitivity together we get what is called an equivalence relation an
equivalence relations partition sets into equivalence classes which behave like equality.
Thank you .