Now, let us take up the next concept. Now we have handled two points, now let us
take three points . And, let us say those three points lie on
a line and given that the point P cuts the line segment AB in the ratio m is to n. Our goal is to know the coordinates of point
P; this will give us the Section Formula . So, this is the graphical representation of the
points. So, there are two, there is a line segment
AB and point P cuts this line segment in the ratio m is to n. How will you find the coordinates of point
P? This is the question; let us bring in our
coordinate system . So, let the coordinates of A and B are x 1 and y 1 and x 2 and y 2
, the coordinates of A are x 1, y 1 coordinates of B are x 2, y 2. I do not know what is P, let us assume the
it has some coordinates which are x and y ok. So, let us bring in them in the coordinate
system which is this. Let us try to understand this particular coordinate
system by putting up some triangles around. So, what I have done is I have actually constructed
two triangles using the same logic, that I used in the distance formula. If the coordinates of point P are x comma
y, then I will construct a right angle triangle in this direction; where the x coordinate
will be x and y coordinate will be the coordinate of y coordinate of A that is y 1. Similarly, I will do a same thing with respect
to point B; I will drop a perpendicular which will meet at this particular point. So, basically I will drop a perpendicular
which will meet the X axis and again I will draw a perpendicular here . But, let us for
sake of simplicity we have constructed a right angle triangle, where the y coordinate of
this point will be y and the x coordinate of this point will be the x coordinate of
point B which will be x2 , x 2 comma y. With this understanding we can proceed further
and see that the triangles, these two triangles are similar to each other. How? First of all let us see this line is parallel
to X axis and this line is as parallel to X axis as well. Therefore, these two are parallel lines and
this is a transversal that is passing through these two parallel lines. Therefore, these two angles the angle A and
angle P will be same or equal . Next these two are right angles, then we know
the sum of the angles in a triangle is 180 degrees, therefore this angle, angle B must
be equal to angle P. Therefore, triangle AQP must be similar to triangle PRB by angle test,
that essentially means I have their sides in some ratio correct. So, for simplicity I have plotted these points
with some coordinate references . So, this is A is 2 comma 2, B is 8 comma 8;
then whatever I mentioned the coordinates of Q are x comma 2 and coordinates of R are
8 comma y . So, now these two things will be in some ratio that is AP by PB, AP by PB
these are the hypotenuse of these two right angle triangles is equal to AQ by PR and this
thing is QP by RB right or you can see AP by PB is equal to AQ by PR which is equal
to PQ by BR . Now, I already know AP by PB have a ratio
m is to n. So, their ratio is m by n that is already
known to us, that is given to me. Now, can I calculate the length of AQ and
PR? The answer is yes, because AQ is parallel
to x axis. It is just subtracting the highest x coordinate
from the low . So, it will be x minus 2 in the figure and
in our theory it is x minus x 1 . Similarly, you can look at PR; it will be 8 minus x or
in our theory it will be x 2 minus x. For y axis or the lines that are parallel
to y axis PQ and BR you can see you will go to the highest value, that is y minus 2 or
y minus y 1 and the other one BR will have y 2 minus y right. So, together I will have a representation
of this form: m by n is equal x minus x 1 upon x 2 minus x which is equal to y minus
y 1 upon y 2 minus y. Now, take one equality at a time; that means,
m by n is equal to let us say these the consider these x coordinates. So, we will just cross multiply them, rearrange
them you will get what x is equal to. In a similar manner just take m by n is equal
to this, these y coordinates ratio and then cross multiply and rearrange them. You will get the following values which are
given by x is equal to m times x 2 plus n times x 1 upon m plus n. And, similarly y is equal to my 2 ny 1 upon
m plus n. This gives me the section formula, when a
point divides the line in the ratio m is to n. Another interesting question is suppose I
know the coordinates of x and y; can I find in what ratio the line divides? Obviously, yes because you know the coordinates
of the line, you just need to use this formula for finding the ratio ok; that will be more
clear when you solve more problems ok .