Now the question can be asked that if a line
is given to me I can uniquely determine the slope, but if a slope is given to me can I
uniquely determine a line? That is the next question that I will put
up. In any sense the question asks can there be
many lines with same slope? The answer can be seen in this GIF image. If you look at this image closely what I have
what we have done is? We have fixed one line we have fixed this
line, this line is fixed and we know how to compute the slope of this line we have a it
will be minus 1, minus 1 will be the slope of this line based on the coordinates. Now, the line the blue line that is revolving
around is actually having the same inclination as the orange line. Now, the orange line and blue line have the
same inclination; that means, tan of them a tan of those inclinations will be same,
will match and hence there can be infinitely many parallel lines which have a same slope. So, the answer to this question, can slope
of a line uniquely determine a line? The answer is no, you cannot uniquely determine
a line given the slope of a line or the inclination of the line ok. Now, why do we study the concept of slope
or whatever we studied how it is helpful? The helpfulness of this concept is just what
we discussed in this graphical image, what we are seeing is if the inclinations are same
the line better be parallel right. So, for parallel lines I can use this concept
and derive a condition of slope. Similarly, I can do by rotating them by 90
degrees; that means, I we can consider the perpendicular lines and I can consider general
two lines intersecting each other and see what condition I can derive based on the slope. So, I want to explore the usefulness of slope. So, to explore this I will first figure out
the condition for parallel lines and I will figure out the condition for perpendicular
lines, in due course we will find the relation between slopes of two lines and their intersection
and their angles of intersection ok. This is what we will do in next few minutes. So, let us go to the next characterization
of parallel lines via slope. Now as you can see in this image there are
two parallel lines, they have same inclination, but they are not unique that is what we figured
out ok. So, if I play this video you can see again
the similar this is similar to what we have seen in the last video. So, I have something which is moving around
and there can be infinitely many lines, what remains constant is the inclination, the inclination
it is same if I have parallel lines. So, let us try to see whether we you can derive
something. So, let to put it in a proper context let
l 1 and l 2. Let orange line be l 1 and the blue line be
l 2 be two non-vertical lines. Why non-vertical lines? Vertical lines have angle of 90 degrees for
which the concept of slope is undefined, inclination 90 degrees for which the concept of slope
is undefined. So, what I need is non-vertical lines. So, considered two non-vertical lines with
slopes m 1 and m 2 given the slopes their inclinations alpha and beta respectively. Now, if you have been given that l 1 is parallel
to l 2 then alpha is equal to beta, inclinations are same that is what we have seen in the
figure and that is what we discussed in the last slide also. So, if alpha is equal to beta and then naturally
tan alpha is equal to tan beta, once tan alpha is equal to tan beta; what is tan alpha? It is the slope of line 1 1 that is m 1 and
tan beta is the slope of line l 2 which is m 2. Therefore, clearly the slopes are equal m
1 is equal to m 2. The converse that is assumed that, if the
slopes are equal then tan alpha is equal to tan beta by a definition. Now, tan alpha is equal to tan beta does that
imply alpha is equal to beta? In our case because we are restricting the
inclinations to vary from 0 to 180 degrees the value of tan is uniquely determined. And therefore, because alpha and beta lie
in 0 to 180 degrees alpha is equal to beta which resolves the problem; that means, their
inclinations are same. That means the two lines are parallel. So, l 1 is parallel to l 2. So, what is a characterization of parallel
lines? That means, if I want to say two non-vertical
lines l 1 and l 2 are parallel then it suffices to check whether their slopes are equal or
not. If they are parallel then the slopes better
be equal and if the slopes are equal then we have parallel lines ok. Now similar characterization we are searching
for in perpendicular lines. So, let us go and try to figure out this characterization
for perpendicular lines. Let us try to visualize, what are the perpendicular
lines? So, here are two perpendicular lines one l
1 and l 2 let us take the orange line as l 1 and blue line as l 2. So, l 1 will have slope m 1, l 2 will have
slope m 2 angle of inclination of l 1 is alpha then inclination of beta if it is perpendicular
to line 1 1 is 90 plus alpha which is beta. And, then you may play with the tans of it
tangent function of it and you can get something which is very interesting. So, let us try to figure out what is that
interesting thing that we are getting. So, to put it formally let l 1 and l 2 be
two non-vertical lines because I cannot work with vertical lines theta equal to 90 degrees,
the slope concept of slope is not defined which slopes m 1 m 2 inclinations alpha and
beta respectively, no problem in this. If l 1 is perpendicular to l 2 as the case
as is the case in this a figure I have beta is equal to 90 plus alpha. So, if I want to figure out the relation between
the slopes of 1 1 and l 2 then it is a good idea to take tangent of beta. So, let us take that. So, tan beta is tan of 90 plus alpha correct,
but tan 90 plus alpha if you use that simple formula that is available to you is minus
cot alpha which also can be written as minus 1 by tan alpha, correct. But what is tan alpha? Tan beta is the slope of a line l 2 which
is m 2 and tan alpha is the slope of a line l 1 which is m 1. So, m what just what we have just now derived
is m 2 is equal to minus 1 upon m 1 or m 1 into m 2 is equal to minus 1. That means, if you take two slopes if you
take slopes of two lines take a product of them and if you get the quantity to be equal
to minus 1; that means, you have got a perpendicular lines right. But right now we have not proved that result,
what we have proved just now is if l 1 is perpendicular to l 2 then the product of the
slopes better be minus 1. Now I want to prove if the product of the
slopes is minus 1 then the lines are perpendicular, how will I go about this? Exactly the way we went for parallel lines. So, m 1 into m 2 is minus 1 then I; obviously,
know tan alpha into tan beta is equal to minus 1; that means, tan beta will be equal to minus
1 upon tan alpha or tan alpha is equal to minus of cot beta, but what is minus of cot
beta? Tan of 90 plus beta or either it will be this
way or it will be the other way so, 90 minus beta. So, minus cot beta is either 90 plus beta
or 90 minus beta, in any case the difference between alpha and beta is 90 degrees. Therefore, l 1 is perpendicular to l 2. Hence, we have proved a characterization that
if two non-vertical lines are perpendicular to each other then the product of their slopes
is equal to minus 1 which can be written in this form. Two non-vertical lines l 1 and l 2 are perpendicular
if and only if m 1 into m 2 is equal to minus 1 or you can verbally write product of their
slopes is equal to minus 1. So, this is the characterization of the lines
via slope perpendicular lines via slope. So, we have what we have seen so far is the
characterization of lines, characterization of parallel lines by slope and characterization
of perpendicular lines via slope, what if they are not parallel or perpendicular and
they intersect just like that right? If they are not parallel then they better
intersect each other right. So, in general if I want to have an intersection
of two lines and I know the slopes of those two lines. Can I talk about the angle of intersection
of these two lines? The answer is yes. So, here is the relation between the angle,
relation of angles between the two lines and their slopes. So, what I want to say if once I show the
figure it will be clear. As of now let us understand I have two non-vertical
lines with slopes m 1 and m 2, inclinations alpha 1 and alpha 2 respectively. And, l 1 and l 2 intersect each other, they
are not parallel so they will intersect somehow and they are not perpendicular also. So, they intersect in angles phi and theta
are the adjacent angles that are formed by l 1 and l 2, if they intersect in a perpendicular
manner the adjacent angles will be 90 degrees each. So, that is not an interesting case because
we have resolved that case. So, now, if they intersect at any angle then
this figure will look like this; let us first understand this figure. So, there are two lines l 1 and l 2, there
are two lines l 1 and l 2. So, l 1 has angle of incline inclination alpha
1, l 2 has inclination alpha 2 these two lines intersect over here near phi comma phi near
the y axis phi y coordinate phi and they have two angles; one is theta, another one is phi. So, these two angles are adjacent angles right,
what can you say about the angle theta that is formed. As you can see the angle alpha 2 is obtuse
and alpha 1 is slight acute. So, the angle theta is actually alpha 2 minus
alpha 1 provided alpha 1 and alpha 2 are not equal to 90 degrees. Why? Because I cannot consider vertical lines as
simple as that. So, the angle is 90 not equal to 90 degrees
theta is alpha 2 minus alpha 1. So, if I want to talk about slopes of in terms
of slopes of these lines I better take tangent function and apply it to the angle theta. So, let me do it. So, tan theta will be equal to tan of alpha
2 minus alpha 1. Take a standard trigonometric formula of tan
alpha 2 minus alpha 1 you will get tan alpha 2 minus tan alpha 1 upon 1 plus tan alpha
1 tan alpha 2. But what is tan alpha 2? Tan alpha 2 is nothing but the slope of line
l 2 which is m 2 and tan alpha 1 it is slope of line l 1 which is m 1. Therefore, this the answer to this is m 2
minus m 1 upon 1 plus m 1 m 2 ok. So, I know what is tan theta, now you can
look at the angle phi which is 180 minus theta. So, I can similarly derive a relationship
for tan phi which is tan of 180 minus theta we have already seen, this is minus of tan
theta. So, that m 2 minus m 1 will be swapped to
m 1 minus m 2 denominator remains the same, the condition m 1 m 2 not equal to minus 1
remains the same because they should not be perpendicular. In this case we have figured out what is the
relation of tan of that angle with respect to the slopes of the lines. So, this finishes our discussion on two lines. Now another interesting question that comes
is, what if the three points are collinear, then how will the slopes are interpreted? Imagine three points are collinear then what
happens is their slopes must be equal because they are all lying on the same line right
and there is one common point. So, if A,B,C are collinear slope of AB is
equal to slope of BC and therefore, all of them must be collinear. So, if there is any common point in between
those two those three points then the slopes if the slopes are equal the points are collinear,
that is called the relation of collinearity using slopes ok. That is all for today.