Let us look at next example which is another
application of a general form of equation of a line. The example is stated in the form of a question
that is if I have been given two lines a 1 x plus b 1 y plus c1 is equal to 0 a 2 x plus
b 2 y plus c2 is equal to 0 b1 and b2 not equal to 0 what does mean what does this mean? That means the lines are non vertical ok,
b 1 and b 2 not equal to 0 means lines are not vertical you can verify for yourself. Now two such lines are parallel if a 1 b 2
is equal to a 2 b 1 and perpendicular if a 1 a 2 plus b 1 b 2 is equal to 0 this is an
interesting application of general form of equation of line. And if you recall if you recollect we have
derived some characterization of line in terms of slope. So, let us let us try to see this problem
so let me first identify if I want to characterize parallel and perpendicular lines what should
I do? What is a parallel line how will I identify
a parallel line when I will have their slopes to be equal and how will I identify a perpendicular
line, when the product of the slopes of the two lines is minus 1. So, if you remember this then the job reduces
to finding the slopes of the two lines. Can I find a slope of these lines? Let us say let us first consider this line
a 1 x plus b 1 y plus c 1 is equal to 0 you can you should be immediately able to identify
this with a slope line form slope point form which is y is equal to mx plus c. So if I want to adjust this equation in the
form of y is equal to mx plus c then what should I do I should divide because b1 is
nonzero I can divide throughout by b1 and shift this coordinate of y to their other
right hand side of the right hand side of the equation. So, I will get y is equal to minus a 1 upon
b 1 minus c 1 upon b 1 so what is the slope minus a 1 upon b 1. A similar trick you can apply here and therefore
you will get m 2 is equal to minus a 2 upon b 2 so using slope intercept form you have
got m 1 is equal to minus a 1 upon b 1 and m 2 is equal to minus a 2 upon b 2. Now let us recollect the famous fact because
b 1 and b 2 are not equal to 0 we are not considering vertical lines. So, two non-vertical lines are parallel if
and only if their slopes are equal. So, what you will do you will just put m1
is equal to m2 because you have been given that the lines are parallel. So if you put m1 is equal to m2 minus sign
will cancel each each other a 1 by b 1 is equal to a 2 by b 2 multiply both sides by
b 1 b 2, b 1 b 2 are nonzero. So multiply both sides by b 1 b 2 you will
get a 1 b 2 is equal to a 2 b 1. Therefore the lines are parallel then a 1
b 2 is equal to a 2 b 1. In a similar manner we also know something
about perpendicular lines that the product of their slopes is minus 1 if the lines are
perpendicular. So, just multiply m1 m2 and equated to minus
1 minus sign will cancel each other so you will get a 1 by b 1 into a 2 by b 2 is equal
to minus 1. So take the denominator on the right hand
side that is b 1 b 2 so a 1 a 2 is equal to minus b 1 b 2 which essentially means a 1
a 2 plus b 1 b 2 is equal to 0. Therefore we have proved the result. So, now what we have done right now is we
have related our result about the characterization of perpendicular and parallel line via slope
to a general form of equation and this is the new condition that we are coming up with
if the lines are parallel and you have been given to two non two non -vertical lines and
their general forms then you just need to check that a 1 b 2 is equal to a 2 b 1 and
if for the lines to be parallel. And a 1 a 2 plus b 1 b 2 is equal to 0 for
the lines to be perpendicular. This you can consider as another characterization
of parallel and perpendicular lines using general form a general form of the equation
of lines.