So, we started with the natural numbers and
the integers and then, we moved on to the rational numbers which are defined as p by
q; where p and q are both integers. So, we decided that the rational numbers are
dense right and that means that on this number line between any two rationals, you can find
a rational. So, if I want to now talk about this number
line, then I know that if I take any two positions, then I will find a rational between them and
I will find a rational between them and so on. So, it makes sense to ask this question which
is that if I take any two points and the rational between them any two points, then is this
entire number line composed only of rational numbers. Of course, some of those rational numbers
are integers. So, an integer is a rational number because
I can write 7. For instance, as 7 by 1 right. So, this is of the form p by q. So, any rational number which in reduced form
as denominator 1 is an integer. So, an integer is a special case of a rational
number. So, do all the rational numbers fill up this
number line? That is the question .
So, it turns out this is not the case. So, remember that a square of a number is
the number multiplied by itself. So, if I take a number m and multiply it by
itself, I get m squared which is m times m and if I take this operation and turn it around,
then the square root of a number is that number r such that r times r is equal to m right. So, I want to find out which number, I have
to square in order to get m and that is called the square root. So, if we take the so called perfect squares,
like 1, 4, 9, 16, 25 and so on their square roots are integers. So, 1 squared is 1. So, the square root of 1 is 1; 2 squared is
4, so the square root of 4 is 2; 5 squared is 25, so square root of 5 is 25 is 5; 16
squared is 256, so square root of 256 is 16 and so on. So, some integers are clearly squares of other
integers and so, you can get the square root and find an integer. Now, what happens if something is not a square
right. So, supposing I take a number which is not
a square like 10 and I take its square root, I know that the square root is not an integer,
its somewhere between 3 and 4 because 3 squared is 9 and 4 squared is 16. Question is, is it a rational number or not? So, what happens to the square roots of integers
that are not perfect squares. So, the smallest such number which is not
a perfect square because 1 remember is a perfect square, 1 times 1 is 1. The smallest such number that is not a perfect
square is actually 2 and it is one of the very old results that the square root of 2
cannot be written as p by q. This was certainly known to the ancient Greeks,
in fact, to Pythagoras and one way to do this is to see that you can actually draw a line
of; so, this is not an unreal number in that sense right. So, you can actually draw a line of this length
because if you take a square, whose sides are 1 right. So, this is 1, then if you remember your Pythagoras
theorem; then, the hypotenuse of this triangle is going to be square root of 1 plus 1. 1 squared plus 1 squared, technically which
is square root of 2. So, I can actually physically draw a line
whose length is square root of 2. So, this is a very real quantity. On the other hand, for reasons that we will
not described here, but there will be a separate lecture explaining this for if you are interested. Square root of 2 cannot be written as a rational
number p by q. So, here is a number which is a very measurable
quantity, I can actually draw this quantity as a length. At the same time, it does not fit into this
number line of rational numbers which seems to cover all the rational numbers, all the
numbers because they are dense. So, square root of 2, since it is not a rational
number right and yet it exists is called an irrational number and these numbers which
constitute all the rational numbers and the real irrational numbers together are called
the real numbers. So, the real numbers are denoted by this double
line R. So, we had N for the natural numbers, Z for the integers, Q for the rational numbers
and now, we have the real numbers R . So, the real numbers extend the rational numbers
by these so called irrational numbers which are very much on the number line, but which
cannot be written on the form p by q. Now, it is not difficult to argue that like
the rationals, the real numbers are dense for the very same reason. Because if you have two real numbers r and
r prime such that r is smaller than r prime, then you can just take their average r plus
r prime divided by 2. This must be a number which is bigger than
r and it is smaller than r prime and therefore, it must lie between them. So, between any 2 real numbers you will find
another real number. So, the real numbers are also dense. So, there are some irrational numbers which
we use a lot in mathematics and which you have probably come across; one of them is
this famous number pi which comes when we are talking about circles. Because it is the ratio of the circumference
to the diameter ok and this is an invariant. Pi is always the diameter, the circumference
divided by diameter for any circle is pi ok. So, pi is an irrational number. We cannot write it in the form p by q and
it has this, if you write it in this decimal form, it has this infinite decimal expansion. Another number which is very popular as an
irrational number is this number e which is used for natural logarithms. So, it is 2.7182818 and so on right. So, there are a lot of rational numbers. So, square root of 2 as we have seen as a
rational number. It will turn out that square root of anything,
square root of 3 is also an irrational number, square root of 6 is also an irrational number. Anything which is not a perfect square, its
square root is actually an irrational number. But many of these numbers are not very useful
to us, but pi and e are certainly very useful irrational numbers. So, now, we have seen that we can find more
numbers on the line than just the rationals and these are the real numbers. So, do we stop here? Well, let us look at the square root operation
which we use in order to claim that there are irrational numbers. So, what happens if we now take the square
root of a negative number like minus 1? So, remember that we had a sign rule for multiplication. The sign rule for multiplication said that
if I multiply any two numbers, then if the two signs are the same that is their two negative
signs or two positive signs, I will get a positive sign in the answer. Only if the two signs are different, if I
have one minus sign and one plus sign, will I get a negative answer ? So, if I want to
multiply two numbers and get a minus 1, one of them must be negative and one must not
be negative; but by definition, a square root is a number which is multiplied by itself,
the same number has to be multiplied by itself. So, it will have the same sign. So, any square root which multiplies by itself
must give me a positive number. So, if I take a negative number, there is
no way to find a square root for it. So, if we want to find square roots for negative
numbers, we have to create yet another class of numbers called complex numbers. So, complex numbers extend the real numbers,
just like real numbers extend the rational numbers and rational numbers extend the integers
and so on. But the good news for you is that we do not
have to look at complex numbers for this course. So, to summarize, a real numbers extend the
rational numbers by adding the so called irrational numbers which cannot be represented of the
form p by q and a typical example of an irrational number is the square root of an integer that
is not a perfect square. So, square root of 2 for example is not a
rational number and this is also of the case was square root of 3, square root of 5, square
root of 6 and so on. So, except for the perfect squares, none of
the square roots are actually rational numbers. Now, just like we said that the rational numbers
are dense because the average of any two rational numbers is a rational number. Similarly, the real numbers are dense because
the average of any two real numbers is a real number. So, we have a progression in terms of numbers. So, every natural number that we started with
is also an integer because the integers extend the natural numbers with negative quantities. Now, every integer is also a rational number
because we can think of every integer as a ratio p by q; where, the denominator is 1. And finally, every rational number is a real
number because we said that the real numbers include all the rational numbers plus all
the irrational numbers. And finally, we said that there are even things
beyond rational numbers like complex numbers, but we will not discuss them.