So we have verified the answer now what you
can see here is minus 1, 2 is a point which is perpendicular to the which is lying on
the line which is perpendicular to the given line. An interesting question can be asked
that what is the distance of this; point from the given line. Let us try to answer that
question in the next slide. So, the question is given any point I have
another line the point is not collinear to the line then what is the distance of that
point from a line. So, let us try to take that let us take that as our goal. To be precise
we are interested in finding the distance of the point P which has coordinates x 1 y
1 of this point from the line l which has equation Ax plus B y plus C is equal to 0
and this is a general form of equation. Now how will we proceed? So, if I want to
understand the location of P, I need to do some analysis because Ax plus By plus C equal
to 0 is a completely geometric object. So, I need to understand this line in terms of
its geometric concepts. So, what are the geometric concepts associated with this line they are
slope x intercept y intercept or points on the on this particular line. So, let us identify
those things first. So if we assume that a and b both are not
equal to 0 then I can rewrite this equation in the form of intercept form that is x by
A plus y by B equal to 1 so in that case my small a is actually minus C by A that is x
intercept and my small b will be minus C by B which is y intercept. So, I have identified
this line as I have identified the 2 points and these 2 points uniquely determine the
line. So, I know how the line is located. Let us try to visualize this line in terms
of the graph of a function. So, as you can see I have mentioned that x intercept is minus
C by A so it is mentioned as a point Q which is minus C by A, 0 y intercept is minus C
by B which is identified here so 0 minus C by B the point P is located here it may be
located anywhere but the right now and the point P is located here it has coordinates
x 1 y 1. So, now I want to identify a distance of this point from this line the line joining
the points Q and R. So what is the distance? It is it should be
the shortest distance from the line so the shortest distance in this case if you if you
move along this line the shortest distance in this case is a line a point where the line
is actually perpendicular the point is actually perpendicular to the line. So, what I want
to say is the shortest distance is the one which is the perpendicular distance. So, the
entire question reduces to how to find this perpendicular distance PM. So let us try to see what are the geometric
objects associated with this. So, you can see from the dotted lines the geometric object
that I can associate with this particular distance is a triangle PQR. Now if I want
to find the distance PM I can take help of this triangle PQR so that I will be able to
find the distance PM. So, how will I do that? First you see the if I come if I want to compute
the area of triangle PQR what do I need to know? I need to know the base and the height and
the area of a triangle is half base into height. So, half base into height means half times
QR into PM. I do not know what is PM, correct. But we have already seen in this course how
to find area of a triangle where its coordinates are given. So, I know even though I do not
know what is PM I know how to compute the area of a triangle. The next question is do
I know how to compute the length QR? Yes of course because this is x intercept
this is y intercept and these are the lines which are the distances on x and y axis and
all of them form a right angled triangle. So, by Pythagorean theorem I will be able
to find the length of QR. So, I can reformulate the question as PM is equal to 2 times area
of triangle PQR upon QR. So, now I know how to compute the length PM if I know how to
compute area of triangle and how to compute the length of segment line segment QR both
both of which I know right. So let us go ahead and try to compute area
of triangle PQR. So, here is our formula for area of triangle PQR which is which has coordinates
x1 y1, x2 y2 and x3 y3. So, let us start with x1 y1 the x1 y1 is the first coordinate remember
you will always take this in anti-clockwise direction. So, I will start with this kind
this coordinate then I will go to R and then I will go to Q. So, this is x1 y1 this is
x2 y2 and this is x3 y3 according to the notation that is given in the formula. So you will see x1 times y1 is minus C by
B and y3 is sorry x1 is the first coordinate you look at this term x 1 into x 1 into y
2 minus y 3 so x 1 is first coordinate it will remain x 1 because P has coordinate x
1 y 1, y 2 is minus C by B y 3 is 0. So, you will get x 1 into minus C by B minus 0 then
the next term that is x 2, x 2 here is 0 so this entire thing vanishes then you go to
x 3 what is x 3 x 3 is minus C by A into y1 which is y 1 as it is minus minus C by B so
y 1 plus C by B me this is how I got the formula. So if you look at this formula closely you
can actually take C common from all within the mod sign so you can take mod C by B denominator
has B and AB terms containing B and AB. So, you can if you want to take those terms out
you multiply throughout by AB. So, you or you find the LCM is AB and you take AB out
so you will get half times mod C by mod B a x 1 plus B y 1 plus C remember this is this
is the term corresponding to general form of the equation. Now we know how we have seen how to compute
area of triangle PQR. Next we will see how to compute the length QR. But length QR is
actually very easy because I have a point Q which has x only x-coordinate and I have
a point R which has only y-coordinate. So, it will be it is as if computing the distance
of length QR is square root of C square by A square plus C square by B Square these are
the 2 sides of the triangle and this QR is the hypotenuse of that triangle right angle
triangle. So, again you can simplify this to amend to
this form so you can take out C common so you will get mod C, you take A and B common
you will get mod AB and then you will get square root of A square plus B Square which
is which is in the numerator and now if you look at this form PM which is the length of
the line segment PM is 2 times area of triangle PQR upon QR so just now it is just a matter
of feeding the values this half will get cancelled with this 2 and area of triangle PQR is this
and QR is this therefore this this constants also will vanish because they are same. And you will get the formula to be equal to
modulus of A x 1 plus B y 1 plus C upon square root of A square plus B Square this is how
you will calculate a perpendicular distance of a point from a line. Now this idea can
be helpful in finding one more thing that is a distance of a parallel to distance between
two parallel lines. So, the question can be asked is I have two
parallel lines what is the distance between two parallel lines. So, let us take the set
up because the lines are parallel l1 and l2 they have common slope or the same slope,
so their slope is m. Then you can use the slope point form which is y is equal to mx
plus c 1. Now I want to use the previous concept that I have introduced distance of a point
from a line. So, I will first identify this with x intercept. So, what will be the x intercept
in this case? If you identify this line it is very easy
to see go back to the general form and figure out that x-intercept is minus c 1 by m, because
b is equal to 1 here A is equal to minus m and capital C is equal to small c minus c
1 so the intercept is this minus c 1 by m. Let us take another line that is l2 it has
same slope identify it with our standard form A is minus m B is 1 capital C small c –minus
c 2 ok. So, now given x-intercept what are the coordinates of this x-intercept minus
c 1 by m and 0. So now the problem reduces to finding the
distance of this point from this line ok. So, by using the distance of a point from
a line formula where the point is minus c 1 by m, 0 you you just need to substitute
this point x1 y1 into this into the formula for the distance of a line which is given
by so I am just A x 1 plus B y 1 plus C in the modulus upon square root of A square plus
B square. So, my point x 1 is minus c 1 by m substituted here y y1 is 0 substituted here
you will get the formula to be equal to c 1 minus c 2 upon square root of A square plus
B square so in this case A square plus B Square B was 1, A is m minus m so it is 1 plus m
square. Now you can actually identify this formula
in the general equation form also. So, in the general form instead of B equal to 1 we
have slope which is equal to minus A by B and c 1 is equal to minus C 1 by B and c 2
is equal to minus C 2 by B right. So, this I am matching with both equations in general
form these are slope point forms but now if you match these equations with a general form
you will get this description of the line where you have Ax plus By plus C 1 as one
line is equal to 0 as one equation of line. Ax plus By plus C2 equal to 0 as equation
of the second line. So, in that case this is the form and therefore now you just substitute
with these identifications substitute these values into this expression. So, this m will
be replaced by minus A by B so you will get square root of A square plus B Square here
and some mod AB will come out common and therefore finally that will cancel off with this B and
you will get the expression of the form mod C 1 minus C 2 which are the C 1 and C 2 belong
to general form of equation upon square root of A square plus B Square. So this gives us a clear-cut understanding
of the interconnection between the slope point form and general form of equation and we have
figured out what is a distance between two parallel lines using distance of a point from
a line formula ok. So, now we will solve some examples to concretize
the concepts so here are the examples in line. So, you have been asked to find a distance
of a point 3, minus 5 from the line 3x minus 4y minus 26 is equal to 0. So, in this case
or you just need to apply the formula what is a formula Ax 1 plus B y 1 plus C in the
modulus upon square root of A square plus B Square. So, what is ABC here is the key
question? X 1 y1 is known to be 3 comma minus 5. So, a is 3 B is minus 4 C is minus 26 then
you just need to apply that formula that is A x 1 plus B y 1 which is minus 5 C is minus
26 plus C minus 26 and upon square root of 3 square plus minus 4 square which will give
me 2 and the denominator will be square root of 25 it will give me 5 the numerator will
be 3. In a similar manner you can ask a question
what is the distance between two parallel lines x plus 4 sorry 3x minus 4y plus 7 is
equal to 0 3x minus 4y plus 5 is equal to 0. So, it will be mod C 1 and so what is a
formula that we have derived it is mod C 1 – C 2 upon square root of A square plus
B square it is very straightforward. So, what is C 1 here C 1 the first line the constant
term is 7 the second line the constant term is 5. So, it will be modulus of 7 minus 5
upon 3 square plus minus 4 square so you will get the answer to be 2 by 5 ok done.