So, after looking at area of the triangle
using coordinates, let us now focus our attention to again a two point system and one-dimensional
objects that is a line. We have already seen in our basic classes
that two points uniquely determine line. Now, if I want to characterize a line, and
if I give you two points I should be able to find a line passing through these two points. How that quantity is the geometric object
is algebraically related to the coordinate geometry. That is what we want to explore now, to explore
that I need a concept of a slope of a line. So, what essentially is the slope of a line? In a vague manner, what we understand by slope
of a line? If you look at the horizontal this coordinate
plane which is displayed here. If I am moving some units in x directions;
the question can be asked with respect to this, with respect to this change in x direction
what is the corresponding change in y direction, ok. So, if I want to answer that question then
I need to consider a ratio of change in y direction to change in x direction; some people
call it as rise by run ratio, run is in the horizontal direction, rise is in the vertical
direction. So, you can consider slope of a line as a
rise by run ratio. So, let us try to make this work concept more
clear by showing some examples. So, now, here is a line with two points given
onto it. Again, our standard conventional method we
will construct a right angled triangle using these two points. Now, the question that I posed is what is
a rise by a run can be answered over here. For example, you look at this right angle
triangle, what is happening? This is the movement of a line in moving from
this point to this point in y direction, this vertical length is the direction, is the movement
of a line in moving from this point to this point in y direction and this horizontal line
is a movement in x direction while moving from point A to B in on a line, ok. So, essentially what I need to capture is
the change in this direction from this point to this point, that means here to here that
is minus 2 comma minus 4 that is minus 6 in moving from here to here that is minus 2 comma
minus 4 minus 2 minus 4; that means, minus 6 and here also minus 6. So, the slope of a line can be equal to 1. This we can make it more precise by giving
some formal definitions. So, if I want to find the slope of a line
given the coordinate plane, I can always identify these two points as x 1 y 1 and x 2 y 2. I will construct a right angled triangle;
I will construct a right angle triangle which intersects the point at x 2 comma y 1. And once I constructed, as I mentioned you
know what is the change in x direction and what is the corresponding change in y direction,
therefore, you can actually compute the ratio of this. And the but while computing the ratio, you
can also think remember some concept from trigonometry. For example, when I constructed this right
angle triangle there is some angle formed over here this arc denotes that angle. Let us call that angle as theta, right. Now, what I am saying is change in y upon
change in x, but can you relate some quantity related to this trigonometric ratio that is
tan of theta, right. So, what I can say is my m or the slope of
a line is MB, MB by AM which is y 1 minus y 2 upon x 1 minus x 2 and which is also equal
to tan theta, right. So, I have introduced two, I have defined
one thing that is m which is the ratio of these two, but which in turn turned out to
be equal to tan theta, right. So, if it is tan theta, see here it does not
matter whether I take y 1 minus y 2 or y 2 minus y 1 whatever I am doing I should do
synonymously. For example, if I have taken y 2 minus y 1
then I should take x 2 minus x 1 or if I have taken y 1 minus y 2 then I should take x 1,
then I should take x 1 minus x 2. So, it does not matter which order you are
swapping because finally you are taking the ratio right whatever you are doing you do
it asynchronously, you do it in sync, so so that there will not be any confusion. So, M is tan theta. Now, I have introduced two terminologies here
m and theta. So, let us define them properly. This m is called slope of a line, which is
what we which is the topic of this discussion. And then this theta is called inclination
of a line with respect to positive x axis measured in a anti-clockwise direction. Now, somebody may say I have drawn this angle
over here, but if you look at this particular line, this line is parallel to x axis. And this line is intersecting x axis here,
that means even if I consider this angle, this angle also will be theta from the basics
of geometry, correct. So, now how far the question can be asked
how far the theta can go, ok. So, to answer that question let us try to
see if I am considering a theta then theta can be equal to 0, theta equal to 90 degrees
tan is not defined. As you can see tan of 90 is not defined, but
it can go up to 180 degrees. So, the theta the variation of theta allowed
is 0 to 180 degrees. So, now let us have a look at the salient
features of the slope of a line. In particular, let us see if the line is parallel
to x axis the angle of inclination is 0 degrees, therefore the slope of a line should be 0. Now, if the angle is 90 degrees; that means,
90 degrees with respect to x axis; that means, eventually I am on y axis or in fact, I am
on y axis in such case tan 90 is undefined, right. Therefore, slope is undefined. As you can see if I have an angle which is
90 degrees that is y axis; that means, x is equal to constant is the equation of the line. And you cannot have any movement in y direction
or you can have infinite movement in y direction without any change in x direction. That itself creates a problem therefore, the
slope is undefined for theta is equal to 90 degrees or the angle of inclination is equal
to 90, inclination is equal to 90 degrees. So, with respect to inclination there is another
definition of slope. If theta is the inclination of a line l then
tan theta is called slope or gradient of the line. This is the definition, on a second definition
of our slope of a line which matches exactly with the original definition, but there there
will be some glitch, there may be some confusion ambiguity. So, let us try to resolve that ambiguity because
this theta is the angle made with respect to positive x axis, right. And theta not equal to 90 degrees I can define
M is equal to tan theta. That is perfectly fine and it is well-defined
over there whenever it is not equal to 90 degrees. What is the ambiguity? The ambiguity can be shown in the figure. For example, now what is theta over here? Theta over here is actually this particular
angle this is theta. Now, if I you look at this particular angle
which is theta you can see that this is an obtuse angle. Now, how to evaluate a tan of this angle? We already know some methods, but will that
contradict with our definition of slope. That is the question. So, if I use the rise by run formula or the
change in y to up on change in x formula, how will I figure out the slope? So, the answer is I will simply drop a perpendicular
or I will construct a right angle triangle with right angle at point M which is minus
4 comma minus 2. In that case, I will be interested in this
angle that is angle at A in our older definition or this angle is essentially equal to 180
minus theta of this angle. This angle is 180 minus theta. So, let us go further. This angle is equal to this angle. What is the measurement of this angle? It is 180 minus theta. That means, if I want to find a slope according
to our definition that is delta y by delta x or change in y by change in x, then I need
to consider the angle of this particular structure that is tan of 180 minus theta, right. So, m is tan of 180 minus theta. Now, what is tan of 180 minus theta? If you use simple trigonometric formula you
will get tan of 180 minus theta is nothing, but minus tan theta. But what is minus tan theta? You can easily see what is minus tan theta
which will be y 1 minus y 2 upon x 1 minus x 2. So, in short our formula for slope is consistent
no matter which definition we use, therefore a slope of a line is uniquely determined given
a line.