After section formula let us try to understand
the three points when they are not on one line that is when they form a triangle. So, you have been given three points, and
you know they are not collinear points and therefore, they will form a triangle. And the question can be how to find the area
of triangle using the coordinate system. So, let us try to see that using the coordinate
system. So, there is some triangle ABC and I want
to find the area of triangle ABC. Let the coordinates of that triangle be x
1, y 1, x 2, y 2 and x 3, y 3. Once I have these coordinates, I can plot
it here. You can see on the right there is an image
of a triangle. Now, how to find the area of this triangle? Now, whatever I discussed so far everything
actually relied on dropping a perpendicular to x axis and finding the area of the geometric
object that is formed. In earlier cases, it was just a triangle. Now, if we follow that theory then you can
easily see that I need to do something like dropping a perpendicular to x axis. So, I have dropped perpendiculars to x axis. Now, I have generated some figures. What are the figures that I have generated? In particular, I have generated 3 trapeziums,
trapezium ADFC that is the biggest one encompassing everything. Then, you can look at trapezium ABED or ADEB,
then you can look at the trapezium BEFC, right. Now, my triangle is trapped in between these
trapeziums. So, let us try to make our understanding crystal
clear. If I want to find the area of triangle ABC,
then I need to first consider the biggest possible quadrilateral or trapezium that is
ADFC and eliminate the areas of two smaller trapeziums that is ADEB and BEFC. And whatever I am left with is the area of
triangle ABC. Now, do I know how to find the area of trapezium? Yes, I know. The formula is half times sum of parallel
sides into the height of the trapezium. So, we need to quantify what how these quantities
will be calculated. Let us consider trapezium ADFC, if I consider
a trapezium the ADFC then what are the parallel sides of this trapezium? Side AD and side FC or CF, right. So, I will take average of these two parallel
sides that is half of AD plus FC. Then, what is a height? Height should have a perpendicular distance,
so that is x axis. So, I know the distance will be DF, correct. So, let us take the general coordinate system
rather than using this coordinate system. What are the coordinates of AD? So, D will have in our general coordinate
system the coordinates of AD will be, A has coordinates x 1 y 1 and D is after dropping
a perpendicular on x axis. So, its y 1 coordinate will vanish, that is
y coordinate will vanish and therefore, the coordinates coordinates of D will be x 1 comma
0. So, what will be the length of AD? It will be purely in terms of y that is y
1. Similar, thing is applicable for CF. So, it will be nothing but y 3; so, half y
1 plus y 3. Now, what is the length of line segment DF
or FD? Highest minus the lowest, right. So, in this case our F is 8 comma 0 or x 3
comma 0 and D, the point D is x 1 comma 0. So, it is x 3 minus x 1. We can easily see the point here is actually
the copy of 8 in this particular thing, our C is this, so my point is x 3 minus x 1. In a similar manner, I can actually see a
smaller trapezium that is ADEB, smaller quadrilateral that is ADEB and the length of that quadrilateral
will be, the length or the height of that quadrilateral will be the length of ED which
is 2 in this case or x 2 minus x 1 in the coordinate system, ok. So, this is what our understanding of the
length is. In a similar manner, the parallel sides are
y 1 and y 2, lengths of parallel sides is y 1 plus y 2. So, I have this angle. In a similar manner you can compute BEFC. Now, using this you can compute the area of
the triangle which can be easily seen to be in this form. So, I have just taken this example and computed
this, these values. So, the values are effectively in this particular
case the length of AD was, the length of AD was 2 yes, 4 comma 2 and 4 comma 0, the length
of AD was 2. The length of CF was 3 into 4 minus and similar
calculations go ahead, minus half into 2 plus 1 into 2, minus half into 1 plus 3 into 2. So, essentially what I got here is the length
the area of the triangle ABC is 10 minus 3 minus 4 which is 3 square units. Now, if you look at this particular thing
and rewrite this expression you will get a very nice expression. You can juggle with this expression and try
to simplify it by taking a cross products and you will come up with the expression of
this form. The absolute sign is just to ensure that the
area value should not be negative, but the calculation still remain same. And you need to consider the one reminder
or one caution here, you need to consider all the vertices of a triangle in an anticlockwise
direction, right, then only this formula is valid, ok. So, I have considered area of a triangle. Now, we have, what we have seen so far is
given two points how to find the distance between two points, given three points if
they are collinear we have found how to find how section formula can help us to find their
ratios or the coordinates of the middle point. Now, if the points are non-collinear we have
seen how to compute the area of the triangle using the coordinate system.