Now let us go ahead and try to figure out
some spatial variations where the calculations become extremely easy for these calculation.
These two forms are primary two-point form and slope line form ,slope-point form. So,
when you consider slope point form you can also consider a special case that is slope-intercept
form. So, this is an this is the methodology that we will use for considering slope-intercept
form, before that let me define what is an intercept.
So, let l be the line with slope m that cuts Y axis at point c. Then this c is called y
intercept of the line l. So, what is the meaning that it cuts Y axis at c? The y coordinate
of that point is c and the x coordinate is 0; that means, any point will be that for
the point that it cuts through Y axis of line l will be of the form 0 comma c and that 0
comma c will lie on line l. Now we have our slope point form instead of
having any point x comma y you have a specific point which is 0 comma c. So, I apply the
slope point form or point slope form in this expression. What you will get is, y minus
y naught instead of y minus y naught you have y minus c which is equal to m, m is the slope
of the line m times x minus x naught. What is x naught? 0.
So, so we will get y minus c is equal to m times x right and therefore, I will get a
form y is equal to mx plus c, this is a standard form that we generally deal with when we are
dealing with straight lines. So, you have got a slope-intercept form which is of the
form y is equal to mx plus c. The interesting fact is the calculations are
very simple whenever you are given the slope-intercept form. For example, now if you know the y intercept
is at c and the slope is m you do not have to do any calculations, but straight away
write this expression that is y is equal to take the slope m, take the intercept c; y
is equal to mx plus c will be your answer. Therefore, the calculations simplify significantly
when you are considering a slope-intercept form. If the intercept is not available then
you may have to go to that point slope form and figure out what it is. Now there can be
if the line cuts Y axis the line can as well cut X axis. So, there can be another variation
of this formulation that is if a line l with slope m cuts X axis at point d. Then d will
be called as x intercept of the line l. If d is called as x intercept of the line
l then how will my; how will this point lie on the line l or what are the coordinates
of the line that intersects X axis and line l? So, what is the point of intersection?
That will be d comma 0 and this d comma 0 lies on line l. So, I will again use the point
slope form of the line and have. So, so if I want to use point slope form y
minus 0 is equal to m times x minus d will be the answer. So, that will be the form y
is equal to m x minus m d. So, let us try to use this and derive some and solve some
problems for finding the slope-intercept form or equations of the line using slope-intercept
form. So, typically some example like this. So,
I want to find the equation of a line with slope is half and y intercept is minus 3 by
2. Remember here things are very easy because you just need to know mx plus c. So, what
is m? m is half and c is minus 3 by 2. So, upfront I can tell you orally this, the equation
of the line will be y is equal to half x minus 3 by 2. Let us verify the result using the
graphics and all other things. So, here is the y intercept of this particular
line. So, here the y intercept is at point minus 3 by 2. Now slope is half correct. So,
the equation of line you can easily see is half x minus 3 by 2. So, let us try to figure
out what is the x intercept of this line. So, y is equal to half x minus 3 by 2. So,
the x intercept of this line is 3 x intercept of. So, the question could have been asked
that find find the equation of a line with slope half and x intercept equal to 3 that
also can be a question and the answer will be same.
So, let us figure out the let us see what is the next question that is find the equation
of a line with slope half, but x intercept is 4 it is not 3. So, it is definitely not
a same line because x intercept is 4, but the slope is half. So, can you find can you
relate it to some of the concepts? The slope is half; that means, the slopes are equal,
we have we have seen that if the slopes are equal then lines must be parallel to each
other. So, therefore, I can easily see that the line
must be parallel to this line with some different intercept which is at 4 for this the intercept
is 3 so, intercept is 4. So, what can be the y intercept can also be an interesting question.
We will answer it later. Right now let us see how we can answer that, answer the question
that is asked here. Find the equation of line with slope half and x intercept 4.
So, according to our formulation y is equal to mx minus md right. So, where d is the intercept
that is 4 so and this is half. So, y is equal to half times x minus 4 is the equation of
this line right. So, y is equal to half x minus 4 is the equation
of this line, you can simplify this which will give you 2 y minus x plus 4 is equal
to 0. So, this will be the expression for the line ok. This is the slope-intercept form
of the line, now we can go to two point form that is suppose I have been given x intercept
and y intercept how will I identify the line. So, let us now go to the form of intercept
that is intercept form, how to find equation of line when you have been given two intercepts
x and y. So, let us formulate the hypothesis, suppose a line makes x intercept at a y intercept
at b then naturally the coordinates of these two points are a comma 0 and 0 comma b. So,
we will use two- point form to derive the equation of line.
So, I will take this point as the first point therefore, the coordinate y coordinate is
0. So, y minus 0 is equal to b minus 0 upon 0 minus a into x minus a. So, the two point
form is y minus 0 equal to b minus 0 upon 0 minus a into x minus a.
Now, you divide throughout by b then if you divide through this expression throughout
by b then you will get y by b is equal to minus x by a plus 1. So, because this has
a minus sign shift it to the left hand side and you will get this expression which is
x by a plus y by b is equal to 1, now you see how beautiful is this expression; x intercept
is a so, below x you put a y intercept is b. So, below y you put b.
Therefore, there is nothing to memorize, it is just a simple trick that x upon x intercept
plus y upon y intercept equal to 1 that is how you will get the intercept form. So, it
is very easy to solve the problems if you remember this trick.
Now, let us take one example where we need to find this. So, find the equation of line
having x intercept at minus 3 and y intercept at 3. So, you do not have to do any complicated
calculations, you can simply say x upon minus 3 plus y upon 3 will be equal to 1 multiply
throughout by 3 you will get the expression y is equal to I think x plus 3, yes.
So, you will get y is equal to x plus 3, let us verify whether this satisfies because it
is always better to verify using graph. So, x intercept is minus 3 y intercept is 3, the
line that passes through these two points is y is equal to x plus 3. This is what the
intercept form is, it is very simple and you can practice more and more problems.
That is all for today.